# RDBMS (Relational Database Management System)

1. It's a piece of software
2. Perform CRUD operation on data
3. Data stored in the from of tables

## Advantages

- No data redundency
- Data concurrency ===> RDBMS has a locking system which prevent abnormalities from occuring.
- Data searching by search query
- Data Integrity ===> Same type of data

## Limitations

- Rigid schema
- High cost
- Scalability issues (Horizontal scaling/sharding is very difficult) ===> Vertical scaling is easy.

Issue with Horizontal scaling with RDBMS ===> Releated tables

# NoSQL (Non-SQL Database | Non relational database)

NoSQL is tha unbrella term comprising of four different types of databse.

1. Key-Value database ===> Value stored in the form of key-value pairs. Generally used in caching.
   - Ex :- Redis
2. Document database ===> Data stored in the form of documents in JSON format.

   - Combines relational concepts
   - Dynamic schema
   - Horizontal scaling

3. Columnar database ===> In the databse columns are stored together instead of rows. Because of that the aggregation in such database is rapid. It is widely used for Data analytics.

Let say there is a table in which data is stored about 10 students and we want to find the maximum marks among all thse students.

1. Relational database (Rows grouped)

   - All rows should be read insted of just reading the marks column and then it find the maximum marks.

2. Columnar database (Column grouped)

   - Instead of reading all colums and rows it only see the marks column and read the entire column and find the maximum marks value.

Ex:- Cassandra (Mostly used in data analytics, machine learning)

3. Graph database ===> Graph database represents and stores entities and relationships in the form of graph data structure. It is majorly used for social networks.

Mostly used in where data should be stored like a tree structue.

- Ex :- Like Facebook friends (Mutual(Direct), indirect), LinkedIn folowers(diect relation, indirect relation), Google maps, ......etc

Example :- Graph

# Polyglot persistence

If a single database is not fulfilling the application reqeuirements we can use multiple database for the application that process is called "Polyglot persistence".
