# Authentication VS Authorization

Authentication means verification about who are you. Therefore, we have to login in the system and needs to be verify our identification.

Once we have logged in we can perform some actions. But the point is in the application what are the permission we have to do called Authorization. To be more precise Authorization states does a user is eligible to do the action or not?

Ex:- In a whatsapp group there could be lots of members but only few people are admins. The question is do a regular member who not actually an admin does the user perform the delete operation of the whatsapp group?

The answe is _no_. Because a regular member does not have that kind of permission.

Hence,

- Authentication ===> Initial verification
- Authorization ===> Authentication is required + Permissions

# Basic Authentication

This is a simplest kind of authentication where user initially register by entering a username with a strong password and user uses both username and the password further for authentication.

## Advantage

    - Simple
    - Easy to use

## Disadvantage

    - Not secure
    - With every reqeust server need the username and the password for verification that will hamper the user experience

# Token Based Authentication

This is an extended version of authentication. Let's understand

- Initially user creates account with a username and a strong password.

- Login with the username and the password

- Server generate a token and sent to the client(browser) in the form of cookies.

- The token is used to verify the user with all subsequent request, user dosen't need to pass the username and the password as a payload for verification. Whenever user push a new request to the server browser will send the cookie automatically to the server and server catch the cookie and verify the user.
- In the token there is a payload that set by server itself and when user reqeusts for something from the server the cookie sent by browser catched by server and then it extract the payload or the user values that he set earlier and verify the user identity.

- After a time-period the token will expire to security purpose.

- Once token is expired user needs to re-login.

# OAuth

Generally we create a signup form for new user to create an account but in today's world the cahnges happens with a rapid speed and user getting lazy overtime so there has to be some sort of ways by which we can signup a user in a few second for it's convenience.

OAuthe offers the service. It is used to signup a new user with a few click and user is ready to user the application. Any big application uses the service like facebook, github, LinkedIn, E-commmerce site,...etc
